---
title: Rules
---


## Courses

  - Course 1-BIN-301 is for computer-science related programs, namely
    BIN, INF, mINF, mAIN, DAV (shortly denoted computer science)
  - Course 2-AIN-501 is for students from Faculty of Natural Sciences
    and physics (shortly biology)

## Grading

  - 3 homework assignments 30% (10% each)
  - Journal club 10%
  - Quizzes 10% (each week 1%)
  - For computer science: final exam 50%
  - For biology: project 50%

To pass the course, you need to satisfy both requirements below
(otherwise Fx grade will be assigned):

  - overall at least 50% of points
  - computer science: at least 50% of points from the final exam
  - biology: active participation at tutorials

Final grade: A: 90+, B: 80+, C: 70+, D: 60+, E: 50+

Homeworks may contain separate versions of some questions, one for
computer science students and one for biologists.

## Journal club

Journal club is a group activity, where each groups studies one
scientific paper and rewrites it in their own words.

  - More details later

{% if false %}
  - Each student will select from the provided list the three articles
    that are of highest interest to him/her.
  - According to these preferences, instructors will divide the students
    into groups. Each group will read a different article.
  - We will create a group for each paper in Moodle which can be used
    for any discussions.
  - Each student first reads the assigned article individually.
  - Then the whole group meets, discusses the article and tries to
    clarify any questions or to find missing information in the
    literature.
  - If needed, the group meets several times or continues to communicate
    electronically. In case of questions about the article, the whole
    group or some of its members can also arrange consultations with the
    instructors.
  - The group writes a report, in which they explain in their own words
    the main methods and results of the article and other necessary
    concepts so that the text is understandable to students of this
    course (both computer scientists and biologists).

Details for the journal club group meeting

  - Remember that everyone should read the article before the first
    meeting
  - The first meeting should take place no later than November 22. The
    meeting can be online (e,g, in MS Teams) or in person. Try to choose
    a time suitable for all members of the group.
  - At least 24 hours before the first group meeting, post its date,
    time and location to the Journal club discussion forum in Moodle
  - After the first meeting, one representative of the group will post a
    short summary to the Journal club discussion forum in Moodle stating
    who attended the meeting, who apologized and who did not respond to
    the group and what was the outcome of the meeting - whether the
    group had problems with some parts of the article, whether it plans
    to meet again, whether they need a consultation with the
    instructors, etc. You do not need to report subsequent meetings,
    unless you need help.
  - Failure to hold the first meeting according to these rules may
    affect the grade of the final report.

Advice and instructions for the written report from the journal club

  - In the report, describe the main methods and results of the article
    in your own words
  - The report should be understandable for students of this course
    (both computer scientists and biologists), so explain the necessary
    terms that are not explained in the article
  - You do not have to cover the entire content of the article in the
    report and, conversely, you can use other resources
  - Try to express your own view of the topic, do not strictly follow
    the text of the article
  - The recommended length is about 1-2 pages per person. However, the
    report should form one coherent text, so agree well on the outline
    and division of work and spend some time at the end on combining and
    editing individual contributions into a coherent report.
  - The report should list the members of the group who have actively
    participated in its work. Students who are not on this list will
    receive zero points for the report.
(% endif %}

## Exam

The exam is primarily in a written form and takes 2-3 hours. The content
will be specified later. You can bring a cheat sheet - 2 pages of A4
paper with arbitrary content (handwritten or printed).

If you do not pass the exam during the first, regular date, the second
and third attempt may involve an oral part in addition to written part.

If circumstances force us to do the exam online, it will be also
followed by an oral exam to verify that you understand the course
material tested in the written exam.

## Project

  - The project is done by biology students instead of exam.
  - More details later
  {% if false %}
  - Project topic will be chosen during the semester by November 3.
  - We recommend starting working on the project during the semester and
    consult any questions during tutorials for biologists.
  - The final report will be due during the exam period, followed by a
    short personal meeting with discussion of the project.
  - Further details on [separate page](./Project.html).
  {% endif %}

## Academic integrity

Cheating and plagiarism on homeworks and exams is a serious violation of
academic integrity.

On homeworks, you are **not allowed** to copy other person's work (eg
from a classmate, from the Internet including AI chatbots, or from
scientific literature) and submit it as your own. You are also not
allowed to let another person to copy your solution. We allow and
encourage discussion among students about individual homework tasks.
However, the solutions you submit must be your own work written in your
own words. To avoid unnecessary problems, do not take notes during group
discussions about homework and wait at least three hours after such a
discussion before writing the solution to be submitted.

During exams, do not use unauthorized aids and do not communicate with
persons other than the instructors.

In the report from the journal club, you must cite all used literature.
Express the knowledge you have gained on the topic in your own words. Do
not copy or mechanically translate entire sentences from the paper and
other sources (except for short direct quotes indicating the source).
Create your own images or specify the source of the downloaded images
used in the report. Similarly for project reports.

When cheating or plagiarism is detected, we will normally assign a grade
of 0 for the relevant part of the work, with a minimum reduction of the
final grade by one grade. Cheating on the exam will result in the FX
grade for the exam. Serious violations of academic
integrity will be also referred to the dean of the faculty.
